src/10-the-tools.md, before:

# The Tools: DataRadar, bytefreq, and DQPRE

The techniques described in this book are implemented in three tools, each designed for a different scale and a different user. The underlying profiling engine is the same across all three; what changes is the deployment model, the interface, and the volume of data each can handle.

## DataRadar: Browser-Based Profiling

DataRadar is a browser-based data quality profiler that runs entirely client-side using WebAssembly. You upload a file — CSV, Excel, JSON, or NDJSON — and the profiling happens in your browser. No data is sent to any server. No software needs to be installed.

This matters more than it might initially seem. In many organisations — councils, NHS trusts, universities, small businesses — the people who need to assess data quality are working on locked-down machines where they cannot install software. They have no Python, no R, no SQL tools. What they have is a web browser. DataRadar meets them where they are.

The browser tool supports the full DQOR workflow: mask-based profiling at multiple grain levels, population analysis, script detection, and flat enhanced output. For nested or semi-structured data (JSON, GeoJSON), it can flatten the structure and produce the parallel column families (`.raw`, `.HU`, `.LU`, `.Rules`) as a downloadable NDJSON file that can be loaded directly into Pandas, Polars, DuckDB, or any other tool that reads newline-delimited JSON.

A typical use case: a council data analyst receives a GeoJSON feed of planning applications from a government portal. They paste the URL into DataRadar, the tool fetches and profiles the data, and within seconds they can see the structural patterns in each field — including fields with epoch timestamps that the tool has automatically detected and offered to convert to human-readable datetimes. They export the flat enhanced output, load it into Excel or a notebook, and proceed with their analysis using whichever columns they need: raw values for verification, masks for quality assessment, suggested treatments for convenience.

DataRadar is free and available at [dataradar.co.uk](https://dataradar.co.uk). It handles datasets up to approximately 50,000 rows comfortably, depending on the browser and the machine.

## bytefreq: The Command-Line Profiler

For larger datasets, or for integration into automated pipelines, **bytefreq** is the CLI tool. It is implemented in Rust, multi-threaded using Rayon, and handles CSV, Excel, JSON, and NDJSON formats. It is designed for Unix-style pipe workflows and can process files with millions of rows.

The name is historical. The original bytefreq was written in awk in 2007 as a byte-frequency profiler — a tool for counting the frequency of each byte value in a file to determine encoding, delimiters, and character distributions. Over time, it evolved to include the mask-based profiling functions described in this book. The current Rust implementation is a ground-up rewrite that retains the name and the profiling philosophy while delivering the performance needed for large-scale local processing.

### Installation

```bash
# Install Rust if needed
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh

# Install bytefreq from GitHub
cargo install --git https://github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq
```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Profile a CSV file using high-grain Unicode masking
cat data.csv | bytefreq -g HU

# Profile with low-grain masking
cat data.csv | bytefreq -g LU

# Profile JSON data
cat data.json | bytefreq -f json

# Character frequency profiling (encoding inspection)
cat data.csv | bytefreq -r CP

# Generate flat enhanced output with quality assertions
cat data.csv | bytefreq -E
```

The `-E` flag produces the flat enhanced format described in Chapter 9: each field in the input is expanded into its family of parallel columns (`.raw`, `.HU`, `.LU`, `.Rules`), with automatically inferred quality assertions in the Rules column. This output can be piped to a file, loaded into a database, or consumed by a downstream pipeline.

bytefreq is designed for pipe-based workflows, which means it composes naturally with other Unix tools:

```bash
# Profile the first 10,000 rows of a compressed file
zcat data.csv.gz | head -10000 | bytefreq -g HU

# Profile and extract only the masks for column 3
cat data.csv | bytefreq -g HU | jq '.columns[2].masks'

# Profile an Excel file (requires the excel feature)
cargo install --git https://github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq --features excel
bytefreq -f excel --excel-path data.xlsx --sheet 1
```

bytefreq is open source, licensed under MIT, and available at [github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq](https://github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq).

## DQPRE: Enterprise Scale

For organisations working with billions or trillions of rows — central government departments, large financial institutions, telecoms operators — neither a browser tool nor a single-machine CLI is sufficient. **DQPRE** (Data Quality Profiler and Rules Engine) is a Scala/Spark implementation of the DQOR framework designed for distributed processing at enterprise scale.

DQPRE implements the full profiling, assertion, and remediation pipeline as a Spark application. It includes a configurable rules engine that allows data quality teams to define allow lists, exclusion lists, and treatment functions as configuration rather than code, and it produces the flat enhanced output as Spark DataFrames that can be written to Parquet, Delta Lake, or any other Spark-compatible storage format.

DQPRE was developed for and proven at the scale of UK central government, where it runs in production across datasets measured in billions of records. It is now open-sourced and available at [github.com/UKHomeOffice/data-quality-profiler-and-rules-engine](https://github.com/UKHomeOffice/data-quality-profiler-and-rules-engine).

The relationship between the three tools is a product ladder:

1. **DataRadar** (browser) — free, zero-install, up to ~50K rows. Perfect for quick checks, exploratory profiling, and environments where software installation is not possible.
2. **bytefreq** (CLI) — free, open source, millions of rows. For data engineers, CI/CD pipelines, and automated profiling workflows on a single machine.
3. **DQPRE** (Spark) — enterprise, billions to trillions of rows. For large-scale production deployments with configurable rules engines and integration into existing data platform infrastructure.

Each tool implements the same profiling philosophy, the same mask functions, and the same flat enhanced output format. A profile generated by DataRadar in a browser is structurally identical to one generated by DQPRE on a Spark cluster. The techniques scale; the tools scale with them.

## Choosing the Right Tool

The decision is usually straightforward. If you are exploring a dataset for the first time and want to understand its structure quickly, use DataRadar in the browser — it takes seconds and requires nothing to be installed. If you are profiling data as part of an automated pipeline, or the dataset is too large for the browser, use bytefreq on the command line. If you are running data quality at enterprise scale across a distributed data platform, use DQPRE.

In many organisations, all three tools coexist. Data analysts use DataRadar for ad-hoc exploration. Data engineers use bytefreq in CI/CD pipelines and automated quality gates. The platform team runs DQPRE in production. The consistent profiling output across all three means that quality rules and treatment functions developed using one tool can be deployed on any other.

Commit message:

Remove all DQPRE and UK Government references
- DQPRE deserves its own dedicated book
- Removed all mentions of Home Office, DSA, Cabinet Office, Schroders
- Tools chapter now covers DataRadar + bytefreq only
- Added 'Scaling Beyond a Single Machine' section noting Spark is straightforward
- About page simplified to bytefreq, DataRadar, Zenkai Labs

src/10-the-tools.md, after:

# The Tools: DataRadar and bytefreq

The techniques described in this book are implemented in two open-source tools, each designed for a different scale and a different user. The underlying profiling engine is the same across both; what changes is the deployment model, the interface, and the volume of data each can handle.

## DataRadar: Browser-Based Profiling

DataRadar is a browser-based data quality profiler that runs entirely client-side using WebAssembly. You upload a file — CSV, Excel, JSON, or NDJSON — and the profiling happens in your browser. No data is sent to any server. No software needs to be installed.

This matters more than it might initially seem. In many organisations — councils, NHS trusts, universities, small businesses — the people who need to assess data quality are working on locked-down machines where they cannot install software. They have no Python, no R, no SQL tools. What they have is a web browser. DataRadar meets them where they are.

The browser tool supports the full DQOR workflow: mask-based profiling at multiple grain levels, population analysis, script detection, and flat enhanced output. For nested or semi-structured data (JSON, GeoJSON), it can flatten the structure and produce the parallel column families (`.raw`, `.HU`, `.LU`, `.Rules`) as a downloadable NDJSON file that can be loaded directly into Pandas, Polars, DuckDB, or any other tool that reads newline-delimited JSON.

A typical use case: a council data analyst receives a GeoJSON feed of planning applications from a government portal. They paste the URL into DataRadar, the tool fetches and profiles the data, and within seconds they can see the structural patterns in each field — including fields with epoch timestamps that the tool has automatically detected and offered to convert to human-readable datetimes. They export the flat enhanced output, load it into Excel or a notebook, and proceed with their analysis using whichever columns they need: raw values for verification, masks for quality assessment, suggested treatments for convenience.

DataRadar is free and available at [dataradar.co.uk](https://dataradar.co.uk). It handles datasets up to approximately 50,000 rows comfortably, depending on the browser and the machine.

## bytefreq: The Command-Line Profiler

For larger datasets, or for integration into automated pipelines, **bytefreq** is the CLI tool. It is implemented in Rust, multi-threaded using Rayon, and handles CSV, Excel, JSON, and NDJSON formats. It is designed for Unix-style pipe workflows and can process files with millions of rows.

The name is historical. The original bytefreq was written in awk in 2007 as a byte-frequency profiler — a tool for counting the frequency of each byte value in a file to determine encoding, delimiters, and character distributions. Over time, it evolved to include the mask-based profiling functions described in this book. The current Rust implementation is a ground-up rewrite that retains the name and the profiling philosophy while delivering the performance needed for large-scale local processing.

### Installation

```bash
# Install Rust if needed
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh

# Install bytefreq from GitHub
cargo install --git https://github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq
```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Profile a CSV file using high-grain Unicode masking
cat data.csv | bytefreq -g HU

# Profile with low-grain masking
cat data.csv | bytefreq -g LU

# Profile JSON data
cat data.json | bytefreq -f json

# Character frequency profiling (encoding inspection)
cat data.csv | bytefreq -r CP

# Generate flat enhanced output with quality assertions
cat data.csv | bytefreq -E
```

The `-E` flag produces the flat enhanced format described in Chapter 9: each field in the input is expanded into its family of parallel columns (`.raw`, `.HU`, `.LU`, `.Rules`), with automatically inferred quality assertions in the Rules column. This output can be piped to a file, loaded into a database, or consumed by a downstream pipeline.

bytefreq is designed for pipe-based workflows, which means it composes naturally with other Unix tools:

```bash
# Profile the first 10,000 rows of a compressed file
zcat data.csv.gz | head -10000 | bytefreq -g HU

# Profile and extract only the masks for column 3
cat data.csv | bytefreq -g HU | jq '.columns[2].masks'

# Profile an Excel file (requires the excel feature)
cargo install --git https://github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq --features excel
bytefreq -f excel --excel-path data.xlsx --sheet 1
```

bytefreq is open source, licensed under MIT, and available at [github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq](https://github.com/minkymorgan/bytefreq).

## Scaling Beyond a Single Machine

For organisations working with billions or trillions of rows, neither a browser tool nor a single-machine CLI is sufficient. The DQOR principles — mask-based profiling, the flat enhanced format, assertion rules — are straightforward to implement on distributed processing frameworks such as Apache Spark. The mask function is a stateless per-value transformation, which makes it embarrassingly parallel. The assertion rules are independent per-field. The flat enhanced output is a wide table that maps naturally to columnar storage formats like Parquet or Delta Lake. Any team with Spark expertise can implement a DQOR pipeline using the same logic described in this book, scaled to whatever volume their platform requires.

The relationship between the two tools is a product ladder:

1. **DataRadar** (browser) — free, zero-install, up to ~50K rows. Perfect for quick checks, exploratory profiling, and environments where software installation is not possible.
2. **bytefreq** (CLI) — free, open source, millions of rows. For data engineers, CI/CD pipelines, and automated profiling workflows on a single machine.

Both tools implement the same profiling philosophy, the same mask functions, and the same flat enhanced output format. A profile generated by DataRadar in a browser is structurally identical to one generated by bytefreq on the command line. The techniques scale; the tools scale with them.

## Choosing the Right Tool

The decision is usually straightforward. If you are exploring a dataset for the first time and want to understand its structure quickly, use DataRadar in the browser — it takes seconds and requires nothing to be installed. If you are profiling data as part of an automated pipeline, or the dataset is too large for the browser, use bytefreq on the command line.

In many organisations, both tools coexist. Data analysts use DataRadar for ad-hoc exploration. Data engineers use bytefreq in CI/CD pipelines and automated quality gates. The consistent profiling output across both means that quality rules and treatment functions developed using one tool can be deployed on the other.
